the explanation as to why
at the higher emergent level that
certain things occur is
really the explanation it is not
the fact that certain things were
determined to have happened
because the big bang happened and the
laws of motion acted upon particles over
time and
caused them to appear where they
appeared today
that is not an explanation that isn't in
principle
you would be able to describe the motion
of those particles and where they end up
today and so
this is why the fabric of reality
winston churchill
copper atom story is just so deeply
profound
and i think escapes sometimes
the uh escapes discussions on this topic
let's just recap that and you can you
can fast forward the next five or ten
minutes as i go through this
yet again but but let me try and refine
it
in a certain way the the situation is
this
there is a statue in parliament square
in london of winston churchill and the
tip of that statue
is a copper atom why is the copper atom
there now on the one hand
you can say that well the copper atom is
there for the same reason that
any atom is anywhere right now and any
atom is anywhere right now because
13.7 billion years in the past
approximately the big bang occurred
and all of matter and space and energy
exploded out from that point
and eventually some of it over millions
of years coalesced into
stars the first generation of stars at
the end of their lives
some of them exploded in supernova
supernovae explosions
and scattered their contents across
a wide region of space and some of those
atoms due to astrophysical processes
were copper atoms those copper atoms
then
coalesced mixing with the hydrogen
helium and the intergalactic space and
some of them formed new stars
and some of them formed planets as well
like the earth and so the earth formed
out of this previously exploded star or
stars
and contains copper and the copper atom
again under the forces of nature
under gravity and electromagnetism and
so on and so forth weathering and
erosion
ended up in a certain place where it was
quarried and
the forces of nature eventually cause it
to end up at the tip of
winston churchill's nose and that's why
that copper atom is there
due to deterministic physical laws
that's not an explanation that's a
general purpose statement about
any particular bit of matter anywhere in
the entire universe
and when people try to invoke this
to explain away something like free will
for example
and try to say it couldn't have been a
free choice because
you were determined to do what you were
determined to do
because at the big bang the laws of
physics that were there
are still acting right now and you have
to obey these deterministic laws
in the same way that the copper atom had
to obey a deterministic law to end up
where it did
it completely misses the point about
what an explanation truly is
free will is not an attempt to get
outside of the laws of physics
and it's an attempt to explain what is
really going on in the context of a
deterministic universe
in the context of a deterministic
universe
we have species arising that didn't
arise before
but no biologist should be tempted to
say
well there's no such thing as evolution
by natural selection evolution by
natural selection doesn't really create
new species
all that's happening is atoms are
following deterministic laws of physics
that would be ridiculous and i don't
think any physicist makes this point i
don't think any scientist no biologist
makes this point
what they say is the explanation of the
origin of species
is evolution by natural selection it's
this emergent
concept that these things called species
exist
this thing called selection exists and
that
niches are filled or niches as some
people say
by organisms that are fittest in that
particular environment and if the
environment changes
the genes are selected against and the
species can sometimes go extinct
to be filled by new species with genes
that are fitter for that particular
environment
that's an explanation it's an emergent
explanation but all and all of those
things are real
they're really happening selection is
really happening adaptation is really
happening
nature's really exist and species really
exist and fill those niches
now in precisely the same way
all we have to say is that the reason
why
for example the copper atom is at the
tip of winston churchill's nose
the explanation of that is that there
was a war
called the second world war involving
two sides of great powers
dominant among them the united kingdom
and germany
the leaders of whom were adolf hitler
and winston churchill and winston
churchill
eventually won the war for his side
and so we like to out of respect
remember great heroes who saved
civilization
one of whom was winston churchill
and as whom we learned recently karl
popper thought was a great
epistemologist
i'll go back to a previous episode for
that one
winston churchill is his statue is there
with a copper atom
at its nose because we make statues out
of bronze so that they don't weather
away quite so quickly
but someone chose to build that statute
chose to design it in that way in fact
groups of people
came to that decision and freely chose
to do so
and trying to eliminate choice
and freedom out of that whole picture is
to break what would otherwise
be a good explanation because we try to
say it's merely
determined by physical laws
deterministic laws then
we've missed the entire point of trying
to explain what's going on in the real
world
this reductionist conception
of how it is that reality evolves over
time
is simply it's not false but it simply
misses the point
it's true vacuously
we can always say that anything that
happens was determined to happen
it doesn't get us very far
in denying the supernatural we don't
have to
embrace pure reductionist
physicalism we can take another avenue
where we say
yes of course physics is
fundamentally true it's correct as a
description of reality
but it doesn't explain everything that's
going on and besides
the strange thing is that for someone
who says they could
in principle in principle
predict what a person is going to do
next
or predict what is going to happen next
if they had
a full description of the laws of
physics and the initial conditions
is doing nothing in my opinion but
invoking the supernatural
because what is this thing that is able
to actually do that predicting
well an oracle with the full knowledge
of the laws of physics well this oracle
is basically
the omniscient theistic god
the god that knows everything that's
going to happen the god that created the
universe and knows everything that's
going to happen
so it is a an appeal to the supernatural
now someone might say oh no we don't
need that maybe we can just have a
supercomputer of the future
i doubt it this supercomputer of the
future would have to calculate
all of the different alternatives that
could possibly happen in
countless numbers of universes and it
would have to know
with perfect precision what the initial
conditions are
at any particular given time so that it
can make this deterministic prediction
but we know from physics you cannot have
a perfect understanding of the
conditions at any particular time
for all the atoms in the universe we're
going to have
a perfect understanding of where exactly
they are we know that's not possible
given the heisenberg uncertainty
principle among other things but we know
that we can't have this complete
knowledge simultaneously of every single
atom in the entire universe
relativity for another reason so this
idea
that we could in principle in principle
have this
predictive mechanism that would allow us
to determine exactly what's going to
happen next
is itself an appeal to the supernatural
the device required in order to do this
would be magical it would have to have
all the qualities that an omniscient
creator of the universe would have and
so this is why i reject this idea that
in principle the idea that
we could with full knowledge of the laws
of physics and
full knowledge of the initial conditions
predict what's going to happen next
therefore you don't have free will
i think is false because i don't think
such an
in-principle argument
has any bearing on the reality of free
will
when in practice it will never be
possible it will never be possible
because
no such device can do such a measurement
of all the particles in the entire
universe it would have to be
a god of some sort okay that takes me
far away from anything to do with this
chapter again